# Face-Recognition-System
Face (facial) recognition is the identiﬁcation of humans by the unique characteristics of their Faces. Face recognition technology is the least intrusive and fastest bio-metric technology. It works with the most obvious individual identiﬁer the human face. With increasing security needs and with advancement in technology extracting information has become much simpler. This project aims on building an application based on face recognition using different algorithms and comparing the results. The basic purpose being to identify the face and retrieving information stored in database. It involves two main steps. First to identify the distinguishing factors in image n storing them and Second step to compare it with the existing images and returning the data related to that image. 
# DEFINITION
Human beings have recognition capabilities that are unparalleled in the modern computing era. These are mainly due to the high degree of interconnectivity, adaptive nature, learning skills and generalization capabilities of the nervous system. The human brain has numerous highly interconnected biological neurons which, on some speciﬁc tasks, can outperform super computers. A child can accurately identify a face, but for a computer it is a cumbersome task. Therefore, the main idea is to engineer a system which can emulate what a child can do. Advancements in computing capability over the past few decades have en-abled comparable recognition capabilities from such engineered systems quite successfully. Early face recognition algorithms used simple geometric models, but recently the recognition process has now matured into a science of sophisticated mathematical representations and matching processes. Major advancements and initiatives have propelled face recognition technology into the spotlight. Face recognition technology can be used in wide range of applications. Computers that detect and recognize faces could be applied to a wide variety of practical applications including criminal identiﬁcation etc. Face detection and recognition is used in many places nowadays, verifying websites hosting images and social networking sites. Face recognition and detection can be achieved using technologies related to computer science. Features extracted from a face are processed and compared with similarly processed faces present in the database. If a face is recognized it is known or the system may shows similar face existing in database else it is unknown. In surveillance system if a unknown face appears more than one time then it is stored in database for further recognition. These steps are very useful in criminal identiﬁcation. In general, face recognition techniques can be divided into two groups based on the face representation they use appearance-based, which uses holistic texture features and is applied to either whole-face or speciﬁc face image and feature-based, which uses geometric facial features (mouth, eyebrows, cheeks etc.), and geo-metric relationships between them.
An important aspect is that such technology should be able to deal with various changes in face images, like rotation, changes in expression. Surprisingly, the mathematical variations between the images of the same face due to illumination and viewing direction are almost always larger than image variations due to changes in face identity. This presents a great challenge to face recognition. At the core, two issues are central to successful face recognition algorithms: First, the choice of features used to represent a face. Since images are subject to changes in viewpoint, illumination, and expression, an eﬀective representation should be able to deal with these possible changes. Secondly, the classiﬁcation of a new face image using the chosen representation. Face Recognition can be of two types:
Feature Based (Geometric)
Template Based (Photometric)
In geometric or feature-based methods, facial features such as eyes, nose, mouth, and chin are detected. Properties and relations such as areas, distances, and angles between the features are used as descriptors of faces. Although this class of methods is economical and eﬃcient in achieving data reduction and is insensitive to variations in illumination and viewpoint, it relies heavily on the extraction and measurement of facial features. Unfortunately, feature extraction and measurement techniques and algorithms developed to date have not been reliable enough to cater to this need. In contrast, template matching and neural methods generally operate directly on an image-based representation of faces, i.e., pixel intensity array. Because the detection and measurement of geometric facial features are not required, this type of method has been more practical and easier to implement when compared to geometric feature-based methods
